
* https://github.com/ShangtongZhang/reinforcement-learning-an-introduction (讚)
* https://github.com/udacity/deep-reinforcement-learning
* https://github.com/LyWangPX/Reinforcement-Learning-2nd-Edition-by-Sutton-Exercise-Solutions

## ccc: 幫我找出寫得最好的 Markov Decision Process 的文章

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are a fundamental concept in reinforcement learning, and there are many articles and papers that discuss them in depth. Here are a few suggestions for articles that provide a thorough treatment of MDPs:

"Markov Decision Processes: Foundations and Algorithms" by Martin L. Puterman is a classic textbook that provides a comprehensive introduction to MDPs.

"Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction" by Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto is a widely-cited book that covers MDPs and other important concepts in reinforcement learning.

"Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming" by Martin L. Puterman is a more advanced text that covers more advanced topics in MDPs, including dynamic programming and approximate dynamic programming.

"A Tutorial on Reinforcement Learning" by Michael L. Littman provides a broad overview of reinforcement learning, including MDPs and other important concepts.

I hope these suggestions are helpful! If you have any specific questions about MDPs, feel free to ask.




ccckmit@gmail.com
## ccc: 請列出實作 MDP 的簡單程式之網址
There are many ways to implement a Markov Decision Process (MDP) in code, and the specific approach you take will depend on the problem you are trying to solve and the tools and resources you have available. Here are a few suggestions for resources that demonstrate how to implement MDPs in code:

"Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction" by Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto includes several examples of MDPs implemented in Python, including a gridworld example and a chain matrix example. The code for these examples is available online at https://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/~sutton/book/code/index.html.

The OpenAI Gym library (https://gym.openai.com/) is a popular tool for developing and comparing reinforcement learning algorithms. It includes a variety of environments that can be used to test and train MDPs, and the library includes documentation and example code to help you get started.

The reinforcement-learning-an-introduction repository on GitHub (https://github.com/ShangtongZhang/reinforcement-learning-an-introduction) includes code examples and exercises for a variety of MDPs, including gridworld, cliff walking, and chain matrix examples.

The udacity/rl-intro repository on GitHub (https://github.com/udacity/rl-intro) contains code and resources for a course on reinforcement learning, including several examples of MDPs implemented in Python.

I hope these resources are helpful! If you have any specific questions about implementing MDPs in code, feel free to ask.