
## References

Angrist, J.andImbens, G.(1991). Source of identifying information in eval-
uation models. Tech. Rep. Discussion Paper 1568, Department of Economics,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.


Angrist, J.,Imbens, G.andRubin, D.(1996). Identification of causal ef-
fects using instrumental variables (with comments).Journal of the American
Statistical Association 91 444–472.
Arah, O.(2008). The role of causal reasoning in understanding Simp-
son’s paradox, Lord’s paradox, and the suppression effect: Covariate se-
lection in the analysis of observational studies. Emerging Themes in
Epidemiology 4 doi:10.1186/1742–7622–5–5. Online at<http://www.ete-
online.com/content/5/1/5>.
Arjas, E.andParner, J.(2004). Causal reasoning from longitudinal data.
Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 31 171–187.
Avin, C.,Shpitser, I.andPearl, J.(2005). Identifiability of path-specific
effects. InProceedings of the Nineteenth International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence IJCAI-05. Morgan-Kaufmann Publishers, Edinburgh,
UK.
Balke, A.andPearl, J.(1995). Counterfactuals and policy analysis in struc-
tural models. InUncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 11 (P. Besnard and
S. Hanks, eds.). Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 11–18.
Balke, A.andPearl, J.(1997). Bounds on treatment effects from studies
with imperfect compliance. Journal of the American Statistical Association
92 1172–1176.
Berkson, J.(1946). Limitations of the application of fourfold table analysis
to hospital data.Biometrics Bulletin 2 47–53.
Bishop, Y.,Fienberg, S.andHolland, P.(1975). Discrete multivariate
analysis: theory and practice. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Blyth, C.(1972). On Simpson’s paradox and the sure-thing principle.Journal
of the American Statistical Association 67 364–366.
Bollen, K.(1989). Structural Equations with Latent Variables. John Wiley,
New York.
Bonet, B.(2001). Instrumentality tests revisited. InProceedings of the Sev-
enteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. Morgan Kauf-
mann, San Francisco, CA, 48–55.
Bowden, R.andTurkington, D.(1984).Instrumental Variables. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, England.
Brent, R.andLok, L.(2005). A fishing buddy for hypothesis generators.
Science 308 523–529.
Cai, Z.andKuroki, M.(2006). Variance estimators for three ‘probabilities
of causation’.Risk Analysis 25 1611–1620.
Chalak, K.andWhite, H.(2006). An extended class of instrumental variables
for the estimation of causal effects. Tech. Rep. Discussion Paper, UCSD,
Department of Economics.
Chen, A.,Bengtsson, T.andHo, T.(2009). A regression paradox for linear
models: Sufficient conditions and relation to Simpson’s paradox.The Ameri-
can Statistician 63 218–225.
Chickering, D.andPearl, J.(1997). A clinician’s tool for analyzing non-
compliance.Computing Science and Statistics 29 424–431.
Cole, P.(1997). Causality in epidemiology, health policy, and law.Journal of


Marketing Research 27 10279–10285.
Cole, S.andHern ́an, M.(2002). Fallibility in estimating direct effects.In-
ternational Journal of Epidemiology 31 163–165.
Cox, D.(1958).The Planning of Experiments. John Wiley and Sons, NY.
Cox, D.andWermuth, N.(2003). A general condition for avoiding effect
reversal after marginalization.Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series
B (Statistical Methodology) 65 937–941.
Cox, D.andWermuth, N.(2004). Causality: A statistical view.International
Statistical Review 72 285–305.
Dawid, A.(1979). Conditional independence in statistical theory.Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 41 1–31.
Dawid, A.(2000). Causal inference without counterfactuals (with comments
and rejoinder).Journal of the American Statistical Association 95 407–448.
Dawid, A.(2002). Influence diagrams for causal modelling and inference.In-
ternational Statistical Review 70 161–189.
DeFinetti, B.(1974). Theory of Probability: A Critical Introductory Treat-
ment. Wiley, London. 2 volumes. Translated by A. Machi and A. Smith.
Duncan, O.(1975). Introduction to Structural Equation Models. Academic
Press, New York.
Eells, E.(1991).Probabilistic Causality. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.
Frangakis, C.andRubin, D.(2002). Principal stratification in causal infer-
ence.Biometrics 1 21–29.
Glymour, M.andGreenland, S.(2008). Causal diagrams. InModern Epi-
demiology(K. Rothman, S. Greenland and T. Lash, eds.), 3rd ed. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA, 183–209.
Goldberger, A.(1972). Structural equation models in the social sciences.
Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society 40 979–1001.
Goldberger, A.(1973). Structural equation models: An overview. InStruc-
tural Equation Models in the Social Sciences(A. Goldberger and O. Duncan,
eds.). Seminar Press, New York, NY, 1–18.
Good, I.andMittal, Y.(1987). The amalgamation and geometry of two-by-
two contingency tables.The Annals of Statistics 15 694–711.
Greenland, S.(1999). Relation of probability of causation, relative risk, and
doubling dose: A methodologic error that has become a socialproblem.Amer-
ican Journal of Public Health 89 1166–1169.
Greenland, S.,Pearl, J.andRobins, J.(1999). Causal diagrams for epi-
demiologic research.Epidemiology 10 37–48.
Greenland, S.andRobins, J.(1986). Identifiability, exchangeability, and
epidemiological confounding.International Journal of Epidemiology 15 413–
419.
Haavelmo, T.(1943). The statistical implications of a system of simultaneous
equations.Econometrica 11 1–12. Reprinted in D.F. Hendry and M.S. Mor-
gan (Eds.),The Foundations of Econometric Analysis, Cambridge University
Press, 477–490, 1995.
Hafeman, D.andSchwartz, S.(2009). Opening the black box: A motivation


for the assessment of mediation. International Journal of Epidemiology 3
838–845.
Heckman, J.(1992). Randomization and social policy evaluation. InEvalu-
ations: Welfare and Training Programs(C. Manski and I. Garfinkle, eds.).
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 201–230.
Heckman, J.(2008). Econometric causality. International Statistical Review
76 1–27.
Heckman, J.andNavarro-Lozano, S.(2004). Using matching, instrumental
variables, and control functions to estimate economic choice models. The
Review of Economics and Statistics 86 30–57.
Heckman, J.andVytlacil, E.(2005). Structural equations, treatment effects
and econometric policy evaluation.Econometrica 73 669–738.
Holland, P.(1988). Causal inference, path analysis, and recursive structural
equations models. InSociological Methodology (C. Clogg, ed.). American
Sociological Association, Washington, D.C., 449–484.
Hurwicz, L.(1950). Generalization of the concept of identification. InSta-
tistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models(T. Koopmans, ed.). Cowles
Commission, Monograph 10, Wiley, New York, 245–257.
Imai, K.,Keele, L.andYamamoto, T.(2008). Identification, inference, and
sensitivity analysis for causal mediation effects. Tech. rep., Department of
Politics, Princton University.
Imbens, G.andWooldridge, J.(2009). Recent developments in the econo-
metrics of program evaluation.Journal of Economic Literature 47.
Kiiveri, H.,Speed, T.andCarlin, J.(1984). Recursive causal models.
Journal of Australian Math Society 36 30–52.
Koopmans, T.(1953). Identification problems in econometric model construc-
tion. InStudies in Econometric Method(W. Hood and T. Koopmans, eds.).
Wiley, New York, 27–48.
Kuroki, M.andMiyakawa, M.(1999). Identifiability criteria for causal effects
of joint interventions.Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 29 105–117.
Lauritzen, S.(1996).Graphical Models. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Lauritzen, S.(2001). Causal inference from graphical models. In Com-
plex Stochastic Systems(D. Cox and C. Kluppelberg, eds.). Chapman and
Hall/CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 63–107.
Lindley, D.(2002). Seeing and doing: The concept of causation.International
Statistical Review 70 191–214.
Lindley, D.andNovick, M.(1981). The role of exchangeability in inference.
The Annals of Statistics 9 45–58.
MacKinnon, D.,Fairchild, A.andFritz, M.(2007). Mediation analysis.
Annual Review of Psychology 58 593–614.
Manski, C.(1990). Nonparametric bounds on treatment effects. American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 80 319–323.
Marschak, J.(1950). Statistical inference in economics. InStatistical Inference
in Dynamic Economic Models(T. Koopmans, ed.). Wiley, New York, 1–50.
Cowles Commission for Research in Economics, Monograph 10.
Meek, C.andGlymour, C.(1994). Conditioning and intervening. British


Journal of Philosophy Science 45 1001–1021.
Miettinen, O.(1974). Proportion of disease caused or prevented by a given
exposure, trait, or intervention.Journal of Epidemiology 99 325–332.
Morgan, S.andWinship, C.(2007).Counterfactuals and Causal Inference:
Methods and Principles for Social Research (Analytical Methods for Social
Research). Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.
Mortensen, L.,Diderichsen, F.,Smith, G.andAndersen, A.(2009). The
social gradient in birthweight at term: quantification of the mediating role of
maternal smoking and body mass index. Human ReproductionTo appear,
doi:10.1093/humrep/dep211.
Neyman, J.(1923). On the application of probability theory to agricultural
experiments. Essay on principles. Section 9.Statistical Science 5 465–480.
Pavlides, M.andPerlman, M.(2009). How likely is Simpson’s paradox?
The American Statistician 63 226–233.
Pearl, J.(1988).Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. Morgan Kauf-
mann, San Mateo, CA.
Pearl, J.(1993a). Comment: Graphical models, causality, and intervention.
Statistical Science 8 266–269.
Pearl, J.(1993b). Mediating instrumental variables. Tech. Rep. TR-210,
<http://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/statser/R210.pdf>, Department of Computer
Science, University of California, Los Angeles.
Pearl, J.(1995a). Causal diagrams for empirical research. Biometrika 82
669–710.
Pearl, J.(1995b). On the testability of causal models with latent andinstru-
mental variables. InUncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 11(P. Besnard and
S. Hanks, eds.). Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 435–443.
Pearl, J.(1998). Graphs, causality, and structural equation models.Sociolog-
ical Methods and Research 27 226–284.
Pearl, J.(2000a). Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge
University Press, New York. 2nd edition, 2009.
Pearl, J.(2000b). Comment on A.P. Dawid’s, Causal inference withoutcoun-
terfactuals.Journal of the American Statistical Association 95 428–431.
Pearl, J.(2001). Direct and indirect effects. InProceedings of the Seventeenth
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann, San
Francisco, CA, 411–420.
Pearl, J.(2003). Statistics and causal inference: A review. Test Journal 12
281–345.
Pearl, J.(2005). Direct and indirect effects. InProceedings of the American
Statistical Association, Joint Statistical Meetings. MIRA Digital Publishing,
Minn., MN, 1572–1581.
Pearl, J.(2009a).Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. 2nd ed. Cam-
bridge University Press, New York.
Pearl, J. (2009b). Letter to the editor: Remarks on the method
of propensity scores. Statistics in Medicine 28 1415–1416.
<http://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/statser/r345-sim.pdf>.
Pearl, J. (2009c). Myth, confusion, and science in causal analy-


sis. Tech. Rep. R-348, University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
<http://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/statser/r348.pdf>.
Pearl, J.andPaz, A.(2009). Confounding equivalence in observational
studies. Tech. Rep. TR-343, University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
<http://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/statser/r343.pdf>.
Pearl, J.andRobins, J.(1995). Probabilistic evaluation of sequential plans
from causal models with hidden variables. InUncertainty in Artificial Intelli-
gence 11(P. Besnard and S. Hanks, eds.). Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco,
444–453.
Pearl, J.andVerma, T.(1991). A theory of inferred causation. InPrinci-
ples of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: Proceedings of the Second
International Conference(J. Allen, R. Fikes and E. Sandewall, eds.). Morgan
Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 441–452.
Pearson, K.,Lee, A.andBramley-Moore, L.(1899). Genetic (reproduc-
tive) selection: Inheritance of fertility in man.Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society A 73 534–539.
Petersen, M.,Sinisi, S.andvan der Laan, M.(2006). Estimation of direct
causal effects.Epidemiology 17 276–284.
Robertson, D.(1997). The common sense of cause in fact.Texas Law Review
75 1765–1800.
Robins, J.(1986). A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with
a sustained exposure period – applications to control of thehealthy workers
survivor effect.Mathematical Modeling 7 1393–1512.
Robins, J.(1987). A graphical approach to the identification and estimation
of causal parameters in mortality studies with sustained exposure periods.
Journal of Chronic Diseases 40 139S–161S.
Robins, J.(1989). The analysis of randomized and non-randomized aidstreat-
ment trials using a new approach to causal inference in longitudinal studies. In
Health Service Research Methodology: A Focus on AIDS(L. Sechrest, H. Free-
man and A. Mulley, eds.). NCHSR, U.S. Public Health Service,Washington,
D.C., 113–159.
Robins, J.(1999). Testing and estimation of directed effects by reparameter-
izing directed acyclic with structural nested models. InComputation, Cau-
sation, and Discovery(C. Glymour and G. Cooper, eds.). AAAI/MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 349–405.
Robins, J.(2001). Data, design, and background knowledge in etiologic infer-
ence.Epidemiology 12 313–320.
Robins, J.andGreenland, S.(1989a). The probability of causation under a
stochastic model for individual risk.Biometrics 45 1125–1138.
Robins, J.andGreenland, S.(1989b). Estimability and estimation of excess
and etiologic fractions.Statistics in Medicine 8 845–859.
Robins, J.andGreenland, S.(1992). Identifiability and exchangeability for
direct and indirect effects.Epidemiology 3 143–155.
Rosenbaum, P.(2002).Observational Studies. 2nd ed. Springer-Verlag, New
York.
Rosenbaum, P.andRubin, D.(1983). The central role of propensity score in


observational studies for causal effects.Biometrika 70 41–55.
Rothman, K.(1976). Causes.American Journal of Epidemiology 104 587–592.
Rubin, D.(1974). Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and
nonrandomized studies.Journal of Educational Psychology 66 688–701.
Rubin, D.(2004). Direct and indirect causal effects via potential outcomes.
Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 31 161–170.
Rubin, D.(2005). Causal inference using potential outcomes: Design, modeling,
decisions.Journal of the American Statistical Association 100 322–331.
Rubin, D.(2007). The designversusthe analysis of observational studies for
causal effects: Parallels with the design of randomized trials. Statistics in
Medicine 26 20–36.
Rubin, D.(2009). Author’s reply: Should observational studies be designed
to allow lack of balance in covariate distributions across treatment group?
Statistics in Medicine 28 1420–1423.
Shpitser, I.andPearl, J.(2006). Identification of conditional interventional
distributions. InProceedings of the Twenty-Second Conference on Uncertainty
in Artificial Intelligence(R. Dechter and T. Richardson, eds.). AUAI Press,
Corvallis, OR, 437–444.
Shpitser, I.andPearl, J.(2007). What counterfactuals can be tested. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Conference on Uncertaintyin Artificial In-
telligence. AUAI Press, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 352–359. Also,Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 9:1941–1979, 2008.
Shpitser, I.andPearl, J.(2008). Dormant independence. InProceedings of
the Twenty-Third Conference on Artificial Intelligence. AAAI Press, Menlo
Park, CA, 1081–1087.
Shpitser, I.andPearl, J.(2009). Effects of treatment on the treated: Iden-
tification and generalization. InProceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Conference
on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. AUAI Press, Montreal, Quebec.
Shrier, I. (2009). Letter to the editor: Propensity scores.
Statistics in Medicine 28 1317–1318. See also Pearl 2009
<http://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/statser/r348.pdf>.
Shrout, P.andBolger, N.(2002). Mediation in experimental and non-
experimental studies: New procedures and recommendations. Psychological
Methods 7 422–445.
Simon, H.(1953). Causal ordering and identifiability. InStudies in Econometric
Method(W. C. Hood and T. Koopmans, eds.). Wiley and Sons, Inc., New
York, NY, 49–74.
Simon, H.andRescher, N.(1966). Cause and counterfactual. Philosophy
and Science 33 323–340.
Simpson, E.(1951). The interpretation of interaction in contingency tables.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 13 238–241.
Sobel, M.(1998). Causal inference in statistical models of the process of
socioeconomic achievement.Sociological Methods & Research 27 318–348.
Sobel, M.(2008). Identification of causal parameters in randomized studies
with mediating variables. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics
33 230–231.


Spirtes, P.,Glymour, C.andScheines, R.(1993).Causation, Prediction,
and Search. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Spirtes, P.,Glymour, C.andScheines, R.(2000).Causation, Prediction,
and Search. 2nd ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Stock, J.andWatson, M.(2003).Introduction to Econometrics. Addison
Wesley, New York.
Strotz, R.andWold, H.(1960). Recursive versus nonrecursive systems: An
attempt at synthesis.Econometrica 28 417–427.
Suppes, P.(1970).A Probabilistic Theory of Causality. North-Holland Pub-
lishing Co., Amsterdam.
Tian, J.,Paz, A.andPearl, J.(1998). Finding minimal separating sets.
Tech. Rep. R-254, University of California, Los Angeles, CA.
Tian, J.andPearl, J.(2000). Probabilities of causation: Bounds and identi-
fication.Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence 28 287–313.
Tian, J.andPearl, J.(2002). A general identification condition for causal
effects. InProceedings of the Eighteenth National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. AAAI Press/The MIT Press, Menlo Park, CA, 567–573.
VanderWeele, T.(2009). Marginal structural models for the estimation of
direct and indirect effects.Epidemiology 20 18–26.
VanderWeele, T.andRobins, J.(2007). Four types of effect modification:
A classification based on directed acyclic graphs.Epidemiology 18 561–568.
Wasserman, L.(2004).All of Statistics: A Concise Course in Statistical In-
ference. Springer Science+Business Media, Inc., New York, NY.
Wermuth, N.(1992). On block-recursive regression equations.Brazilian Jour-
nal of Probability and Statistics(with discussion) 6 1–56.
Wermuth, N.andCox, D.(1993). Linear dependencies represented by chain
graphs.Statistical Science 8 204–218.
Whittaker, J.(1990). Graphical Models in Applied Multivariate Statistics.
John Wiley, Chichester, England.
Woodward, J.(2003).Making Things Happen. Oxford University Press, New
York, NY.
Wooldridge, J.(2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel
Data. MIT Press, Cambridge and London.
Wooldridge, J. (2009). Should instrumental vari-
ables be used as matching variables? Tech. Rep.
<https://www.msu.edu/∼ec/faculty/wooldridge/current%20research/treat1r6.pdf>,
Michigan State University, MI.
Wright, S.(1921). Correlation and causation.Journal of Agricultural Research
20 557–585.
Yule, G.(1903). Notes on the theory of association of attributes in statistics.
Biometrika 2 121–134.


